Needly, this was one of
the harder exercises,
not because of assignment hopefully,
but because of all the math involved.
It's basic arithmetic, but
it's easy to get things screwed up and
going the wrong direction.
So the first thing we are going
to do to make this drag and
drop machine is we are going
to set our initial context.
And so that's going to be here.
So this is specified
directly on the machine.
And we're gonna see how to
customize this in a later lesson.
So at first, everything starts at 0.
Now on mousedown,
we want to assign the point that we
clicked on the box just like before.
But instead of doing this
as an in-peer side effect,
we're going to be doing
this as an assign action.
So we're gonna say actions: assign,
and since we're only assigning px and
py, We are going to get event.clientX.
And py is going to be same thing,
event.clientY.
Now doing this,
let's make sure that works.
We're gonna be logging the state.context
only if the state has changed.
Cool.
So when we do that,
we see that we do get our updated context.
And you could see that, Just kidding.
This is Exercise 05.
Okay, so once we click,
nothing is happening and
that's because we need to
add our event listeners.
I was sort of mean and
I took those off for
you because you have
to add those yourself.
But thankfully, it's not too hard.
eLBox.addEventListener.
And we're going to add
a mouseDown eventListener.
And we're just going to send
that directly to the service.
So we're going to say service.send.
We're gonna be doing the same thing for
mousemove and mouseup.
And so we'll just do that over here,
elBody.
Also keep in mind that we're
using elBody and not elBox.
And that's because in the browser, the
mouse could move faster than the elements.
So it's very easy for
you to escape the elements and
all of a sudden you're no longer dragging.
And that's why we're adding
an eventListener on the body itself for
mousemove and for mouseup.
Okay, so let's take a look at that again.
When we click, now we get our updated
context, we see that we have px and
py set to be clientX and
clientY of where we clicked.
So that works out pretty well.
Now we also want to keep
track of mousemove, and
we want to do something with that.
So we're going to be assigning the delta.
So let's go ahead and do that.
Actions: assign.
We're gonna be assigning to things,
dx and dy.
So dx is going to be, we don't need the x,
I'm sorry, we do need the context.
So context, event.
And so the delta,
I'm going to cheat here a little bit and
cuz I always get these mixed up.
And if you did too, don't feel bad.
It's a very common thing to get
mixed up what subtracts from what.
So we're going to return the clientX
minus the original point.
Okay, great.
So we return event.clientX-
the context original point x value.
And so we're going to be doing this for
dy as well.
So clientY- context.py.
So for example, if we started at x10 and
we move to 30, that would be 30 minus 10,
which is positive 20, so we know that
we've moved 20 pixels to the right.
And the same thing with dy.
So now let's make sure that that works.
Okay, great.
Now here's an interesting note too.
Notice how we're not console logging when
I move my mouse even though we're still
listening on the body.
And that's because of this state.changed.
Now if I move it outside of
the state.changed, all of a sudden,
our console becomes a lot noisier and
we don't really want that.
We only want it to update when
a state change actually occurred.
So the way that state.changed
works is that we're checking,
did the finite state change?
So did we move, for example,
from idle to dragging?
If so, then yes, the state did change.
If the state didn't change, we ask,
did any side effects occur such as
assignments, or any other action?
And if we have any actions that occurred,
then the state did change.
And those are the only two criteria.
Notice that we're not doing a deep or
a shallow check of the context
objects to make sure it changed.
We're not doing any of that
because we know we could
only change the context
in an assign action.
So even if the finite
state stays the same, and
the context is changed due
to an assigned action.
We know that the state has changed without
having to do shallow or deep property
checks, which makes it really, really,
really fast to check if the state changed.
In fact, that's probably one
of the fastest ways because
we're directly saying, I'll tell
you when the state changes or not,
instead of us having to figure it out by
doing a shallow object equality check.
All right, cool.
So we have our dx, and
we have our px and py.
Notice over here that
we are assigning dx and
dy as CSS variables directly on the box.
What this is going to do is it's going to
move the box, To exactly where we want.
How about you see we have a little
bit of an issue over here.
When we click,
the box sort of does a jarring motion, and
that's because we forgot to do our last
thing, which is assigning the position.
[COUGH] So we're gonna do actions: assign.
And when we go back to idle,
we want to zero out a few things first.
So our dx should be 0,
our dy should be 0, and
we're taking advantage of
static assignments over here.
Our px should be 0.
Our py should be 0.
But we want to assign the x and
y values which represents
the resting position of
the elements as the last resting
position plus the delta.
So we could say x: (context)
return context.x + context.dx.
And we could do the same for y.
So, oops, y: (context)
return context.y + context.dy.
Now, don't worry, it's not like these
are going to influence the other ones.
So even though we're zeroing these out,
that's not going to affect
the context values in here.
So now let's make sure that that works.
And there we go.
We have drag and drop.
Just pretty nice.
If you did the extra credit,
you'll see that we have something else,
which is, let's say that we
want to add the behavior.
And this is one of the benefits of state
charts is that you could do this and
you could add behavior and features and
know exactly how it interacts
with the current logic.
So let's say that we want to keep track of
whether the user has pressed Escape or
not.
And if we press Escape, we want things
to go back to the way they were before.
So in this case, I'm going to send
an event which I'm calling keyup.escape.
And with this,
let's actually make a new transition.
So I'm gonna put keyup.escape.
And here,
I also wanna go to the idle state.
But I want slightly different behavior.
I wants to assign, well,
we're not gonna be changing x and
y because we want it to move
to its original position.
But we're still going to be
zeroing out everything else.
So let's see how that looks.
When we drag, And we press Escape,
notice how it's skewed back
to its original position.
And you saw how effortless
it was to add that behavior.
It's just another transition.
And so if someone says, hey,
we don't actually want that behavior,
it's just as easy as commenting it out or
better yet deleting it completely.
Some people are asking you about
the relationship between data set and
CSS variables and
how they interact with the elements.
How exactly that works, it's not magic.
So first thing we're doing is we
are setting state to the state.value
which is going to be a string.
At least for now.
And so in our elements,
that means we're going to have
data-state = "dragging" or
idle or something like that.
These data attributes are something
that you could look up on NDN and
they're extremely useful,
especially for doing state-based style.
So I'm gonna post that in the chat.
Okay, so when we do that,
we are styling the box, and
those styles are coming from index.scss.
And so the way that we could select
those states is, just like here,
I could say, if the state is idle,
then we have a transition.
So wherever it was before,
that's how you saw it smoothly transition.
When we press the Escape,
it transitions to that original value.
And see we have a couple of other things.
So if I go into style over here,
we see for example,
when data state is active,
the opacity is 1.
So, if you're not using sass,
this is exactly the same
as box(data-state = 'active') opacity : 1.
And that's because whenever
we set those states,
those are going to be
directly on the elements.
So when we drag,
you see that data-state is changing.
And in line, we are adding those dx dy,
a and y values too.
How did I send keyup.escape?
Okay, so you have to do
a little bit of work for this.
When you listen for keyup, you can't
listen listen for specific keyups
on the body, you're going to be given
the keyup for absolutely every event.
So instead, you want to say,
I only want to listen for the Escape key.
And that's done by having the event.key
and checking if it's escape.
So if it is escape,
we could send our custom events,
which remember,
this is the same as type: keyup.escape.
This is an important note too.
You will see in a lot of state machine and
state chart literature and
other examples that using dots s a way of
specifying what a particular event means.
So for example if we have a keyup event,
we know that anything starting with
keyup dot is related to keyup event.
And then we could go down further,
we could have keyup.shift,
keyup.escape, and so on.
In future versions of Xstate, you are
going to be able to define transitions as
partial wildcard transitions,
which means that you could do keyup.*.
And what that means is any
event that starts with keyup,
is going to select that transition.
So that's gonna be
a really useful feature.